Writeup


Title: Loan Length and Amount Funded Associated with Interest Rate
================================================================================

Introduction:
-------------

The Lending Club [1] performs peer-to-peer loans and determines the interest
rate for a given applicant by considering several factors. Although multiple
aspects of an application are assessed, two variables appear to have a key
impact on the final interest rate: the **length of the loan**, and the
**amount funded**.

By understanding the relationship between these variables, we can make
predictions about the interest rate, and inferences about the overall quality of
the loan.

Methods:
--------

### Data Collection

This analysis used a sample of 2,500 loans from the Lending Club, as provided by
instructor Jeff Leek for the Data Analysis class on Coursera.org [2]. These data
were downloaded from the course website on February 16, 2013 using the R
programming language [3].

### Exploratory Analysis

Several exploratory analyses were performed on the data set to assess its
quality and to identify likely correlations among factors. First, observations
with missing values were identified and removed. Second, transformations were
performed to sanitize several factors; in particular, labeled variables were
converted to their numeric equivalents (e.g., `36 months` became `36`). Third,
plots and tables were surveyed to look for patterns and correlations.

Lastly, a singular value decomposition (SVD) [4] was performed to narrow down the
number of factors involved in the next phase of analysis. By plotting the values
of the SVD, the "elbow" suggested that only factors accounting for greater than
10% of the variance should be kept. As such, we retained the following factors
for further study: **Amount Requested** (24.04%), **Amount Funded** (12.29%),
and **Loan Length** (10.57%).

### Statistical Modeling

To relate the three identified factors with the Interest Rate outcome, a
standard multivariate linear regression model [5] was performed. Factors for the
model were selected based on the outcomes of the SVD (*vide supra*).
Coefficients were estimated with ordinary least squares [5].

Results:
--------

The loans data used in these analyses contain information captured about the
following factors of a given loan application:

  - **Amount Requested** (`Amount.Requested`) in dollars;
  - **Amount Funded** (`Amount.Funded.By.Investors`) in dollars;
  - **Interest Rate** (`Interest.Rate`) expressed as a percentage;
  - **Loan Length** (`Loan.Length`) in months;
  - **Loan Purpose** (`Loan.Purpose`) as reported by the applicant;
  - **Debt/Income Ratio** (`Debt.To.Income.Ratio`) which is the amount of the
    applicant's gross income that goes toward paying debts, expressed as a
    percentage;
  - **State** (`State`) where the applicant resides;
  - **Home Ownership** (`Home.Ownership`) indicating whether the applicant owns,
    rents, or has a mortgage on his home;
  - **Monthly Income** (`Monthly.Income`) in dollars;
  - **FICO range** (`FICO.Range`) measuring the creditworthiness of the
    applicant;
  - **Number of Open Credit Lines** (`Open.CREDIT.Lines`);
  - **Revolving Credit Balance** (`Revolving.CREDIT.Balance`) in dollars;
  - **Number of Credit Inquiries within 6 Months** (`Inquiries.in.the.Last.6.Months`);
    and
  - **Employment Length** (`Employment.Length`) expressed in years, except where
    the employment length was less than one year or greater than or equal to ten
    years.

The exploratory analysis identified some missing or erroneous values, but these
observations were retained for the linear model as the missing values did not
appear in the factors under consideration. We also identified some outliers, but
these were also retained as there was effectively no difference in the
coefficients of the linear regression model whether they were included or not.

Early analyses suggested a relationship between applicant FICO scores and
the interest rates of the loan (Figure 1). As suggested by Figure 1, lower
applicant FICO scores emerge as an indicator of higher interest rates. However,
given the parameters of the analysis [2], we also know that interest rates are
our outcome measure and that we are holding applicant FICO scores as a constant.

To inspect the factors identified in our SVD, we performed additional plots to
analyze the relationships between those factors, our outcome (interest rate),
and our constant (FICO score). We replotted the FICO score and interest rate
data, coloring the points by amount requested (Figure 2), amount funded (Figure
3), and by the loan length (Figure 4). Although some stratification was
suggested in the plots for amount requested and amount funded (Figures 2 and 3,
respectively), a much stronger correlation was implied with loan length (Figure
4).

Delving deeper, we fit a regression model that looked at the interest rate
(_IR_) as the outcome and examined the amount requested, amount funded, and the
loan length. Our final regression model was:

$$ IR = b_0 + b_1 (AR) + f(AF) + g(LL) + e $$

where _b<sub>0</sub>_ is an intercept term and _b<sub>1</sub>_ represents the
change in interest rate associated with the identified factors: loan amount
requested (_AR_), the actual funded by investors (_AF_), and the length of the
loan (_LL_). The regression model includes an error term (_e_) to represent all
of the unmeasured and unmodeled sources of variance in the interest rate.

We observed a highly statistically significant relationship between interest
rate and loan length (_P_ < 0.001), as well as a statistically significant
relationship between interest rate and amount funded (_P_ = 0.003); no
significant relationship was found between interest rate and amount requested.
Focusing on the most statistically significant relationship, we noted that a
change in the loan length corresponded to a change of _b<sub>1</sub>_ = 0.14% in
the interest rate (95% Confidence Interval: 0.13, 0.16); a change of one unit
(_i.e._, $1000) in the amount funded corresponded to a change of _b<sub>1</sub> = 1.17%
in the interest rate (95% Confidence Interval: <0.0001, 0.0002).

Conclusions:
------------

These analyses suggest that given the same applicant FICO score, a difference in
interest rate between two loans can most likely be explained by the length of
the loans and the amount funded by investors. Of the two significant factors,
the loan length appears to have the greatest effect, and the stratification that
comes from this effect is rather strongly illustrated in Figure 4.

Despite the strong effect indicated by the linear regression model, there
remains a possibility that other factors may strongly influence the interest
rate of a given applicant's loan. Though the singular value decomposition
technique was used to identify the candidate factors, it is clearly an imperfect
tool. Recall that the SVD pointed to the amount requested as accounting for the
most variance in the data, and that this implied that the amount requested would
also have the strongest effect in the final model. However, the amount requested
ultimately did not have a statistically significant effect on the interest rate.
This outcome leads us to suspect that other variables from the data, which were
otherwise eliminated by the SVD, may affect the interest rate in important
ways. Unfortunately, we did not analyze these other factors with that level of
depth and cannot comment on them except to say that future analyses should probe
them in more detail.

Also, it is important to mention that the Loan Length factor only included two
levels (_i.e._, "36 months" and "60 months"). This may have contributed to the
strength of the factor's effect on the interest rate. It is unclear from the
Lending Club's website [1] whether loans of any other length are available.
Future analyses should incorporate loans with other lengths (_e.g._, 12 months,
24 months, etc.) and/or loans from other sources to see if the effects and
patterns indicated in the linear regression model persist.

References:
-----------

1. The Lending Club website
	URL: https://www.lendingclub.com/home.action
	10 Nov,2013
2. Coursera.org: Data Analysis Assignment:1
	URL: https://class.coursera.org/dataanalysis-001/human_grading/view/courses/294/assessments/4/submissions
   	10 Nov,2013.
3. R Core Team (2013). "The R Project for Statistical Computing." URL: <http://www.r-project.org>.
   	12 Nov,2013
4. SINGLE VALUE DECOMPOSITION (SVD): A GOLFERâ€™S TUTORIAL:
	URL: http://datascientistinsights.com/2013/02/17/single-value-decomposition-a-golfers-tutotial/
   	10 Nov,2013